.. _integration-heartbeat:

==================================
Heartbeat / dead-man's-switch (input)
==================================

Overview
========

The ``heartbeat`` plugin is a *dead-man's-switch*: instead of waiting for a
system to tell you it is broken, you tell Snooze what *healthy* looks like — a
named job that is expected to "ping" at a regular interval — and Snooze raises
an alert when that ping stops arriving.

It is an **input** integration and an **in-process plugin** (no separate
daemon). It is unusually core-integrated for a receiver:

* It owns the ``heartbeat`` collection (a :py:class:`DataModel`), so the generic
  CRUD surface is mounted at ``/api/v1/heartbeat``. Each document describes one
  expectation.
* It exposes an inbound **ping** endpoint at ``/api/v1/webhook/heartbeat`` (a
  :py:class:`WebhookReceiver`). An external job hits it on its own schedule to
  keep its switch alive.
* It runs a single background **scanner** (a :py:class:`LifecycleHook`) that
  ticks every 30 seconds, finds heartbeats that have gone silent for longer than
  ``interval + grace``, and injects one alert per miss into the processing
  pipeline (``source: heartbeat``).

Typical use: a nightly backup, a cron job, an ETL pipeline, or any agent whose
*absence* is the failure you care about.

Configuration
=============

A heartbeat is an ordinary CRUD document. Fields:

``name`` (string, required, unique)
    The heartbeat identifier. Pings select a heartbeat by ``?name=<name>``.

``token`` (string, server-generated, read-only)
    A cryptographically random URL-safe token generated by the server when the
    heartbeat record is created. The operator receives it in the POST response;
    every subsequent ping must supply it as ``?token=<token>``. Do not supply
    this field on create — the server will generate it automatically.

``interval`` (integer seconds, required)
    How often the external job is expected to ping. A heartbeat is "overdue"
    once the silence since ``last_seen`` exceeds ``interval + grace``.

``grace`` (integer seconds, optional, default ``0``)
    Extra slack added on top of ``interval`` before a miss fires — absorbs
    jitter so a job that runs a little late is not flagged.

``last_seen`` (RFC3339 string or epoch seconds, optional)
    The last ping time. You normally leave this unset on create; the ping
    endpoint stamps it. A heartbeat that is never pinged becomes overdue once
    ``interval + grace`` elapses past its (zero) ``last_seen`` anchor.

``severity`` (string, optional, default ``critical``)
    Severity stamped on the miss alert.

``environment`` (string, optional)
    Copied onto the miss alert and into ``raw`` so rules can match on it.

``host`` (string, optional)
    Alert host. Defaults to the heartbeat ``name`` when unset.

``enabled`` (boolean, optional, default ``true``)
    Disabled heartbeats are skipped by the scanner.

``message`` (string, optional)
    Custom miss-alert message. When unset, the default is
    ``heartbeat <name> missed (last seen <t>)``.

Creating a heartbeat
--------------------

The CRUD endpoint lives at ``/api/v1/heartbeat`` and **requires authentication**
(see *Authentication* below). Pass your operator Bearer token:

.. code-block:: console

    $ curl -X POST http://localhost:5200/api/v1/heartbeat \
        -H 'Authorization: Bearer <operator-token>' \
        -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{
              "name": "nightly-backup",
              "interval": 86400,
              "grace": 3600,
              "severity": "critical",
              "environment": "prod"
            }'

The response includes the server-generated ``token`` for this heartbeat.
**Record it** — you will need it when configuring the external job.

This says: *the* ``nightly-backup`` *job pings once a day; allow one hour of
slack; if 25 hours pass with no ping, fire a* ``critical`` *alert.*

Pinging from an external job
----------------------------

The job keeps its switch alive by hitting the ping endpoint at the end of each
successful run. Both ``POST`` and ``GET`` are accepted; the heartbeat name and
its secret token go in the query string:

.. code-block:: console

    # at the end of your cron job / pipeline:
    $ curl -fsS -X POST \
        'http://localhost:5200/api/v1/webhook/heartbeat?name=nightly-backup&token=<token>'
    {"status":"ok","name":"nightly-backup"}

The ping endpoint is **unauthenticated at the network layer** (no Bearer token
required), but the per-heartbeat ``token`` is enforced at the application layer
with a constant-time comparison. A missing or wrong token is rejected with
``401``; an unknown name returns ``404``; omitting ``name`` returns ``400``.

A successful ping updates ``last_seen`` to "now" and re-arms the switch (clears
any previously-fired miss state, so the *next* silent window fires again).

Scanner behaviour
-----------------

* One background goroutine ticks every **30 seconds** (a ``time.Ticker``,
  context-cancellable; no busy loop).
* Each tick it reads all heartbeats, skips disabled ones, and for every enabled
  heartbeat where ``now - last_seen > interval + grace`` it injects **one**
  alert via the pipeline:

  * ``source: heartbeat``
  * ``host``: the heartbeat ``host`` field, or its ``name``
  * ``severity``: from the heartbeat (default ``critical``)
  * ``message``: ``heartbeat <name> missed (last seen <t>)`` (or the custom
    ``message``)
  * ``raw``: ``name``, ``interval``, ``grace``, ``last_seen`` (+ ``environment``)

* A miss fires **at most once per silent window**. The scanner remembers what it
  has already fired (keyed by ``name`` + ``last_seen``) and will not re-fire on
  the next tick. A fresh ping changes ``last_seen``, clears that memory, and
  re-arms the switch.

Authentication
--------------

The heartbeat plugin uses a **two-layer authentication model**:

**CRUD surface** (``/api/v1/heartbeat``) — authenticated
    Creating, reading, updating, and deleting heartbeat records requires a valid
    operator Bearer token (``Authorization: Bearer <token>``). This is the
    standard Snooze login session token, the same one every authenticated CRUD
    endpoint requires. The effective write policy is the default
    ``rw_heartbeat`` / ``rw_all`` grants.

**Ping endpoint** (``/api/v1/webhook/heartbeat``) — network-public, per-heartbeat token
    External jobs may ping without a Bearer/session token. Instead, every
    heartbeat carries a server-generated secret ``token`` field. The ping
    handler validates ``?token=<token>`` with a constant-time comparison so the
    endpoint is safe to expose on the public internet. A wrong or missing token
    returns ``401``; a non-existent heartbeat name returns ``404``.

This split is implemented in ``metadata.yaml`` via ``route_defaults:
authentication: true`` (CRUD authenticated) and a ``routes: /heartbeat:
authentication: false`` per-path override (ping public). The router calls
``AuthorizeRoute(meta, WebhookPath())`` for the ping mount and
``AuthorizeCRUD(meta)`` for CRUD, so both sides are enforced by the existing
middleware.

.. note::

    If your deployment enables the global ``config.ingest.token`` setting
    (a server-wide ingest Bearer token that the router checks on all webhook
    receivers), external jobs will also need to pass that token as
    ``Authorization: Bearer <ingest-token>`` or ``?token=<ingest-token>`` on
    top of the per-heartbeat token. The two tokens are independent: the ingest
    token is a coarse server-wide gate; the per-heartbeat token authenticates
    the specific heartbeat identity.

Field reference
---------------

.. code-block:: yaml
    :caption: Example heartbeat document (as returned by GET /api/v1/heartbeat/<uid>)

    name: nightly-backup
    token: aB3xYz_uV8qR2sNwKpLmTg  # server-generated; supply as ?token= on every ping
    interval: 86400                 # seconds — pings once a day
    grace: 3600                     # seconds — one hour of slack
    severity: critical
    environment: prod
    enabled: true
    # last_seen is set by the ping endpoint; leave unset on create.

End-to-end test setup
=====================

The package ships two env-gated end-to-end tests, both skipped unless
``SNOOZE_E2E_HEARTBEAT_URL`` is set.

``TestHeartbeatE2E``
    Full dead-man's-switch flow: creates a 1-second heartbeat, never pings it,
    and polls ``/api/v1/record`` until the background scanner injects a miss
    alert. Waits up to ~45 seconds (the server scan interval is 30 seconds).

``TestHeartbeatE2EPing``
    Ping-path coverage: creates a separate long-interval heartbeat (3600 s, so
    it never fires the scanner), captures the server-generated ``token`` from
    the create response, then:

    * PINGs ``POST /api/v1/webhook/heartbeat?name=<name>&token=<token>`` with
      **no** ``Authorization`` header → expects ``200``.
    * PINGs again with a wrong token → expects ``401``.

    This test is independent of ``TestHeartbeatE2E`` and does not interfere with
    its miss-alert phase.

Environment variables:

``SNOOZE_E2E_HEARTBEAT_URL`` (required)
    Base URL of a running ``snooze-server`` (no trailing slash), e.g.
    ``http://localhost:5200``.

``SNOOZE_E2E_HEARTBEAT_TOKEN`` (optional)
    Bearer token sent on the CRUD create/list/delete calls. Required because the
    CRUD surface is authenticated (see *Authentication*).

.. code-block:: console

    $ export SNOOZE_E2E_HEARTBEAT_URL="http://localhost:5200"
    $ export SNOOZE_E2E_HEARTBEAT_TOKEN="<jwt>"   # optional
    $ go test -run TestHeartbeatE2E ./internal/pluginimpl/heartbeat/...
    $ go test -run TestHeartbeatE2EPing ./internal/pluginimpl/heartbeat/...
    # or run both together:
    $ go test -run "TestHeartbeatE2E" ./internal/pluginimpl/heartbeat/...

Upgrading from a pre-token release
===================================

Heartbeat documents created before the per-heartbeat ``token`` feature existed
carry no ``token`` field, which means every ping they receive would be rejected
with ``401 invalid heartbeat token``.

On the first restart after upgrading to this version, ``snooze-server`` detects
all tokenless heartbeats and automatically generates and persists a fresh token
for each one (**no manual action required**). The migration runs inside
``PostInit`` and is idempotent: documents that already have a token are left
untouched, so repeated restarts are safe.

.. note::

    **Clustering / concurrent boot:** if two ``snooze-server`` instances start
    simultaneously, they may both generate a token for the same heartbeat. The
    last write wins; both tokens are valid while in flight and only one survives.
    The surviving token is readable from the CRUD API immediately. This race is
    benign.

After the server has started you can retrieve the newly minted token with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer <operator-token>' \
        http://localhost:5200/api/v1/heartbeat/<uid>
    # or list all:
    $ curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer <operator-token>' \
        http://localhost:5200/api/v1/heartbeat

Then update the external job's curl / wget call to include
``&token=<new-token>`` in the ping URL.

Notes & limitations
===================

* **Scan granularity.** Misses are detected on a 30-second tick, so the
  worst-case detection latency is ``interval + grace + ~30s``. Heartbeats are
  minute-scale expectations; sub-second intervals are not the intended use.
* **Resolve alerts.** The scanner only *fires* miss alerts; it does not emit a
  ``state: close`` "recovered" record when a ping resumes. A fresh ping silently
  re-arms the switch. Closing the open alert is left to the operator / a
  notification or rule on the next ping (a future enhancement could emit a
  resolve record on the re-arming ping).
* **Fired state is in-memory.** The dedup set (which window has already fired)
  lives in the plugin process. A server restart re-arms every heartbeat, so a
  still-overdue heartbeat will fire once more after a restart. This is
  intentional — it errs toward visibility.
* **Never-pinged heartbeats.** A heartbeat created and never pinged becomes
  overdue once ``interval + grace`` elapses (its ``last_seen`` anchor is the zero
  time), so it will fire. Set ``enabled: false`` to stage a heartbeat without
  arming it.
* **CRUD auth.** The CRUD surface is authenticated (``route_defaults:
  authentication: true``). See *Authentication* for details.
* **Token rotation.** There is currently no dedicated endpoint to rotate the
  per-heartbeat token. To change a token, PATCH the heartbeat document with a
  new ``token`` value via the authenticated CRUD surface, then update the
  external job's call to use the new token.
